# 1.4b Computational Methods

## Justification for Computational Methods

Computational thinking is about thinking about how a problem can be solved. The process can be described as formulating the problem in such a way so that it can be solved by creating an algorithm. Following the computational methods allow you to create an efficient and helpful solution. They will be useful in my project because:

* Computational methods will be needed as the player will be "saving" progress a lot and the game needs to remember what levels the player has and hasn't completed in order to have a consistent experience.
* The user needs to be able to input different commands to control the character and interact the the game.
* The User needs to be able to see what is happening in the game, this is why a graphical representation is needed, other things such as a physics engine will be used for things that the player themselves do not control.

### Thinking Abstractly and Visualisation

Abstraction is the process of making a complex problem into a more simple one and to focus on the core details, we need abstraction when making a game to make it fun and comprehensible to a wider variety of people.

* A basic stage layout will help with the player not being overwhelmed by a level and can more easily digest what is going on. In the later levels this could become harder to understand as the levels get harder.
* There needs to be a clear and basic user interface that can clearly inform the user how many things that they have collected/ what level they are on, many basics that the user would benefit from, this could also include things like health.
* Some of the simulations in the game will be similar to real life such as physics. This will help to simulate gravity and collisions. Some simulations in the game will not be like real life, such as when you fall, the player will not get hurt in the game but just lose some progress to attempt the puzzle again. Floating platforms are also not realistic.
* The puzzles and behaviour of certain objects. Buttons and levers will cause other things to happen such as opening doors and moving platforms or even activating portals.
* The graphics do not need to be very detailed. The less detailed they are (pixel art style) the easier the player can look at objects and determine what they are and what they do via their appearance.&#x20;

## Thinking Ahead

Thinking ahead is the process of visualising what you want the game to look like and how you want it to function, you get a chance to visualise the game and how you will get to that point.

Some things should remain the same throughout the entire development process and while playing the game, an example of this is the controls the player uses to control the in-game character this is very important as to not confuse the player. The character on-screen will need to take inputs from the player and show up accordingly.

### Thinking Procedurally and Decomposition

Decomposition is the process of determining what sub-processes are needed and the order that they should be in to function correctly. Thinking procedurally is essential to game design as it allows you to follow the code through as you are creating it and have an idea of what the output should be without actually having coded it yet.

### Thinking Logically

Thinking Logically is deciding what decisions should be made based on what information was inputted. This is important to have as it will allow the user to understand what should happen when they input a command.

### Thinking Concurrently

Thinking concurrently is about determining which parts of a problem can be executed simultaneously. Games give the illusion of running concurrently as many processes are run every frame. This is important as it allows you to decide which processes need to be calculated every frame in a game to give the illusion of concurrency. Features that need to be executed simultaneously include:

* When the player presses a key, a decision needs to be made about what will happen, eg. jump
* The program needs to save the player's progress whenever they reach a checkpoint/ end of a level.
* The program needs to be able to determine when the player completes the level.
* The game display needs to be refreshed to show the current state of the game to the player
* The position of the player, platforms and states of objects need to be displayed.
* When interacting with a button, something else will need to happen simultaneously in order for the player to understand what the button did.

Many modern game engines can help with concurrent execution with the inclusion of an update function which is called every frame during the game. This can give the illusion of the game working concurrently despite the game running linearly, an example of this is the animate function in THREE.js that I will be using.
